# biologica 2.0 RFC

### Motivation 1

To have a more maintainable library with type definitions

### Motivation 2

I have always hated needing to transform organisms back and forth between the
BioLogica.Organism class objects and plain-object formats. Frequently in Geni*
we need to turn objects into BioLogica.Organisms before we can use them, or,
worse, check whether we've already been passed an Organism or a plain object.

For this reason it would be nice to define an Organism so that it was simply a
typed object, which could be serialized, read, and used without any further
transformations.

As a result of this, it seems that the library should consist only of pure
functions which take Organisms (or other typed objects) as inputs (e.g.
`createGametes(Organism)` instead of `Organism.createGametes()`). A worry is that
this may result in some awkward syntax.

## Organism definition and creation

### Organism
```
  {
    alleles: "a-a b-b ...",
    sex: "female"
    // optional
    phenotype: {
      trait: characteristic
    },
    // optional
    secondXAlleles: "c d ..."
  }
```

* alleles: string  
   Fully-defined allele string. Two organisms with the same allele string will always
   have the same phenotype. **Or should this be called `genotype`**?
* sex: string  
* phenotype: { [s: string]: string; }  
   It's useful to be able to read the phenotype of an organism easily, e.g.
   `createOrganism(...).phenotype.color` instead of
   `org = createOrganism(...); getCharacteristic(org, 'wings')`, so it seems to make
   sense for this to be a part of any organism generated by the library. However, it
   is redundant information, so it probably doesn't need to be passed in when using
   an organism.
* secondXAlleles: string  
   This formalizes the pattern from geni* that allows us to switch sexes without changing the
   phenotype. **Maybe this is unneeded?** We could presumably also have a `changeSex` function
   that explictly picks second-x-alleles that don't change the phenotype. Do we need this for
   anything else?

### Creation
```
  organism({
    /** optional. One would pass in fully-specified alleles when re-generating
      phenotypes */
    alleles: "a-a b-b ..."
    /** optional. Explicitly specifying the authored syntax */
    authoredAlleles: "a-a b- -c d-[D1, D2] e-^[E1] XY"
    /** optional */
    sex: "male"
  }): Organism

  breed(org: Organism, org: Organism, crossover=true): Organism

  breed(org: Organism, org: Organism, quantity: number, crossover=true): Organism[]

  fertilize(gamete: Gamete, gamete: Gamete): Organism
```

## Problem: Species

In biologica 1.0, we need to pass in a BioLogica.Species object in any Organism creation
method. This seems ugly, and would be even more so now because we'd no longer create
Organism classes that have their own references to the species, so we'd have to *either*
add the entire species spec to every organism, *or* pass in the species spec in every
single method (e.g. `breed(Organism, Organism, Species)`).

One solution would be to have an initialization method that sets up the species from the start:

```
  import biologica from `biologica`

  const Drakes = biologica(drakeSpecies)
  const org1 = Drakes.organism(...)
  const child = Drakes.breed(org1, org2)

  // instead of

  import { organism, breed } from `biologica`

  const org1 = organism(..., drakeSpecies)
  const child = breed(org1, org2, drakeSpecies)
```
The top example seems a little uglier than the alternative below, but saves us from
including `drakeSpecies` everywhere. Thoughts?

Edit: Or maybe we can keep the top solution but make it cleaner by using

```
  import biologica from `biologica`
  const { organism, breed } = biologica(drakeSpecies)

  const org1 = organism(...)
  const child = breed(org1, org2)
```

## Small problem of not using classes

This is probably not so important, but classes with methods can often be read in a
more literate manner: If we wanted to, say, get the image src for an authored organism
in 1.0, we could write

`new Organism(authoredAlleles).getImageSrc()`

In 2.0 it seems that we would either need to split it into two lines or use the backwards

`getImageSrc(organism(authoredAlleles))`

(or we could use the [futuristic](https://github.com/jussi-kalliokoski/trine/blob/5b735cbfb6b28ae94bac0446d9ecd5ce51fb149b/README.md) syntax `organism(authoredAlleles)::getImageSrc()` but
let's not.)

## Authored alleles syntax

```
  a1-a2 b1- -c2 d1 e1-[e2, e3] f1-^[f3] XY
```

This makes the new dashed syntax the prime format (though we probably need to suport authoring
with the old `a:a1,b:a1` synatax) and adds a couple features Geni* has been needing

 * `a1-a2 b1- -c2`  
   Any allele listed on one side or the other of a dash indicates a requirement for that
   allele on the left or right chromosome. (Note, we need to make explicit which side is
  from which parent. This is implicit, not explicit, in 1.0).
* `d1`  
  A required allele that could be on either side.
* `[e2, e3]`  
  Either e2 or e3
* `^[f3]`  
   Not f3
* `XY`  
  It seems like it would be nice to be able to specify the sex of an organism directly in the
  allele string. The sex chromosome are part of the genes, after all, and this would allow for
  authoring organisms with a single string. Unsure whether it should also be part of the
  fully-defined allele string, because it is redundant with `sex`, and it seems like the `sex`
  property is a useful one to have in an Organism. That said, `sex` could also be treated
  like `phenotype`: part of the organism object when created by biologica, but not necessary
  for any functions.

**Thoughts?**

## Gametes

Gametes are generated through meiosis, and it's useful to know where the crossovers occured
and the provenance of the alleles, so that we can accurately depict a meiosis animation if
needed.

In 1.0 we pass back an object with gametes and metadata as separate properties. I think we can do something similar, with the added addition that the `MeiosisData` object should have everything it needs to display meiosis, so this includes the original genotype:

### MeiosisData

```
  {
    genotype: `a1-a2 b1-b2 ...`,
    crosses: {
        [chromosome1Name-a]: [500, 1252, ...],
        [chromosome1Name-b]: [...],
        [chromosome2Name-a]: [...],
        [chromosome2Name-b]: [...]
        ...
    },
    haploidCells: [
        [chromosome1Name-a-1, chromosome2Name-b-1, ...]
        ...
    ]
    gametes: [
        `a1 b2 ... X`,
        `a2 b1 ... Y`,
        ...
    ]
  }
```

* genotype  
  Original genotype of the organism, so we don't need to maintain a reference to it in
  order to display meiosis
* crosses  
  The location along the length of the chromatid of where crosses occurred. Note a chromosome
  named `chromosome1Name` will eventually split into four chromatids. These are made up of
  two pairs with complementary crosses. So we can call them `chromosome1Name-a-1,
  chromosome1Name-a-2, chromosome1Name-b-1, chromosome1Name-b-2` where `chromosome1Name-a-1
  chromosome1Name-a-2` have the exact same crosses but alleles from oposite parents.
* haploidCells  
  These are four cells which become the gamete cells, but here we specify which chromatid
  ends up in each cell, rather than their actual alleles. We need to specify chromatids
  beause the actual alleles may be identical, but we still want to know which one came
  from which parent.
* gametes  
  The genotype of each gamete. This is redundant and can be deduced from the above, but it
  seems useful to put this here rather than requiring another step to transform the above into
  alleles.

Not sure if there is a clearer way to represent this, and if there are any thoughts on the
"haploidCells/gametes" redundancy.

A single `gamete` in this case is just a string, so we'll have

```
fertilize(gamete1: string, gamete2: string): Organism
```
